\chapter{Design}
This chapter portray the design for the proposed implementation of the secure ad
hoc network.

\section{Requirements}
Ad hoc networks have some desired characteristics such as quick and inexpensive
setup and being independent of critical communication infrastructure, but they
also impose great challenges regarding security and more. The challenges
regarding security can vary depending the purpose and environment of the
network.

\subsection{Scenario}
The design and implementation presented in this thesis is mostly based on an
emergency situation scenario, in which communication infrastructure is
unavailable. This thesis will also reflect on some possible requirements given
by a military application.

If there is a major emergency situation such as an earthquake or tsunami, it is
likely that parts or the whole of the communication infrastructure at the scene
is destroyed or temporarily down. The remaining communication lines will then
probably be congested, such that little communication actually goes through.

In this situation, it is of great importance that Emergency Personell, such as
Paramedics, Firemen, Policemen and the Military, are able to communicate
efficiently and therefore independently of the public communication
infrastructure.

They need this network in order to manage the the operation, and therefore
availability is probably the highest regarded trait of this network. Secondly,
they should be able to trust that the communication on the network is to be
trusted, i.e. messages sent are from who they claim they to be.

Also, being able to authorize new actors on the scene, such as Red Cross, can be
critical to the operation. These new actors will probably not have the necessary
authentication tokens, i.e. certificates, required by the authentication scheme
in the network.

\subsection{List of Requirements}
Based on the scenario above these requirements can be extracted and made into
general requirements that needs to be addressed by the system designm.

\begin{table}[ht!]
	\centering
	\begin{tabular}{ | l | p{11cm} | }
	\hline
	\textbf{Requirement} & \textbf{Requirement Description}\\\hline
		R1 & A node must be authorized in order to get full rights in a
		network\\\hline
		R2 & A node without a recognized authentication token should be able to be
		authorized if necessary\\ \hline
		R3 & Networks need a master node which handles access control\\\hline
		R4 & Different networks should be able to collaborate\\\hline
	\end{tabular}
	\caption{Requirements based upon our simplified and general scenario.}
	\label{tab:our_req}
\end{table}



\section{Design Overview}
The secure extension of BATMANasdasdasdasd